---
layout: post 
title: 'Kernel Methods in Machine Learning' 
date: 2018-07-07 
mathjax: true 
comments: true
tags: KernelMethods
---

This blog will talk about one of the most theoretically sound Machine Learning techniques called Kernel Methods which
became popular along with its best known member the Support Vector Machines in the 1990s.

In Kernel theory we assume that learning happens in the **RKHS space**(<span style="color:green">Nice space of functions
for non-parametric statistics and machine learning</span>) and the theorem that forms the backbone for learning in RKHS
is the **Representer Theorem**.

Before scaring you guys with RKHS and theorems right from the beginning, let me explain two main properties of Kernel
methods.

<u>Property 1</u>: Kernel Methods can be thought of as <span style="color:#FF0000">instance-based learners</span>:
rather than learning some fixed set of parameters corresponding to the features of their inputs, they instead "remember"
the $$ i $$-th training example $$ \mathbf{(x_i,y_i)} $$ and learn for it a corresponding weight $$ w_{i} $$. This
basically means functions(hyperplanes in SVM /basis functions in KPCA) learnt through Kernel Methods can be represented
as a weighted linear combination of the training points and what the algorithm actually "learn" are these weights
correspondning to each point. [Representer Theorem]() provides explanation for this. Thus as per theorem the **
regularized risk functional**(basically the objective function of the optimization problem being solved) of any
algorithm which is a member of the Kernel methods takes the following general form:

$$ \hspace{1cm} \frac{1}{N}\sum_{i=1}^{N}C(y_i,f(x_i)) + \frac{\lambda}{2}\Omega(f) $$

$$ \hspace{1cm} \Omega-\text{any monotonically increasing function} $$ $$ \hspace{1cm} C - \text{cost function} $$ $$
\hspace{1cm} f - \text{function that we intend to learn} $$

<u>Property 2</u>: Now comes the <span style="color:#FF0000">"Kernel Trick"</span>. Kernel Methods through Kernel
Functions allow you to perform the learning as if it were projected to a higher dimensional space, by operating on its
original space. **You can  <span style="color:blue">kernalize an algorithm</span> by reformulating it in such a manner
that the computations dependent only on the inner products of the data points than actual data points which then can be
replaced by a Kernel Function<span style="color:#FF0000">(following the property of RKHS)</span>.**

$$\hspace{2cm}\mathcal{k}(x,y) = \langle \phi(x),\phi(y) \rangle \hspace{1cm}\$$

- <span style="color:green">"Why is it nice?"</span>: Say you have a set of images of 32x32=1024 pixels. However this is
  not linearly separable. The option you have is to project it on to a higher dimensional space, lets say quadratic,
  $\mathcal{R}^{1024} \rightarrow \mathcal{R}^{1024x1024}$. Data manupulation in this space is highly expensive. Kernel
  functions allow us to do computations in the lower dimensional space, but effectively learning in the higher
  dimensional space.

Few Algorithms
-----------

1. Support Vector Machines

2. Kernel Ridge Regression


3. Kernel PCA

Appendix
------

<span style="color:green">**<u>Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space(RKHS)</u>**</span>: is a subspace of
the [Hilbert space](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hilbert_space#Definition_and_illustration) with respect to kernel $$ k:
\mathcal{X}\times\mathcal{X} \rightarrow \mathcal{R} $$ constructed in the following manner.

- Let $$ \mathcal{H'} = \\{ k(.x): x\epsilon \mathcal{X} \\} $$ be set of kernel functions.
- We construct a vector space $$ \mathcal{H} $$ using the linear combinations of all kernels functions in set $$
  \mathcal{H'} $$, and any function $$ f\epsilon \mathcal{H} $$ can be represented as a linear combination of a subset
  of these kernel functions as $$ f = \sum_{i=1}^n \alpha_ik(,x_i) $$ for some $$ n,x_i \epsilon \mathcal{X} $$ and $$
  \alpha \epsilon \mathcal{R} $$.

- the inner product of $$ f(.),g(.) \epsilon \mathcal{H} $$ has the following definition:
  $$ \langle f,g \rangle = \sum_{i=1}^n \sum_{j=1}^{n'} \alpha_i \beta_j k(x_i,x_j) $$. (it can proven that this inner
  product is well defined)
- this parculiar definition gives rise to the **reproducing property of hilbert space**. $$ \langle f,k(.x) \rangle =
  \sum_{i=1}^n \alpha_i k(x,x_i) = f(x) $$. This shows that kernel is a representer of evaluation(**evaluation
  functional**), analogous to Dirac delta functions.

- <span style="color:red">What is it's significance?</span> : <span style="color:green">Enables Kernel Trick</span>.
  While learning in RKHS, inner-products in our computations can be replaced by kernels $$ \langle \phi(x),\phi(y)
  \rangle = \langle k(.,x),k(.,y) \rangle=k(x,y) $$, where $$\phi$$ maps $$ x\epsilon \mathcal{X} $$ to an infinite
  dimensional space, $$ \phi : x \rightarrow k(.,x)\epsilon\mathcal{H} $$. This is particularly useful in cases where
  data is not linearly separable in $ \mathcal{X} $, where tranformations to higher dimensional spaces are necessary and
  kernel trick avoids us in making this explicit transformations.

<span style="color:green">**<u>Representer Theorem</u>**</span>: states that a minimizer $$ f^{*} $$ of a regularized
empirical risk function defined over a **Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space** can be represented as a finite linear
combination of kernel products evaluated on the input points in the training set data.

- Precise Definition: Let $$ \Omega : [0,\infty) \rightarrow \mathcal{R} $$ be a strictly a monotonically increasing
  function, by $$ \mathcal{X} $$ a set, and $$ C : (\mathcal{X} × R^2)^N $$ be an arbitrary loss function. Then any $
  \mathcal{f} \epsilon $ RKHS $$ \mathcal{F} $$ minimizing the regularized risk functional

$$ \frac{1}{N}\sum_{i=1}^{N}C(y_i,f(x_i)) + \frac{\lambda}{2}\Omega(f)
$$ admits a representation of the form $$ \mathcal{f}(.) = \sum_{i=1}^{N}\alpha_i k_{x_i} $$.

- <span style="color:red">What is it's significance?</span>: <span style="color:green">**Firstly** it gave a genreric
  definition of optimization objective, that come under the umbrella of kernel methods.</span> **Secondly**, Representer
  theorems[Smola et. all 2011] are useful from a practical standpoint because they dramatically simplify the regularized
  empirical risk minimization problem. In most interesting applications, the search domain $$ H_{k} $$ for the
  minimization will be an infinite-dimensional subspace of $$ L^{2}({\mathcal {X}}) $$, and therefore the search (as
  written) does not admit implementation on finite-memory and finite-precision computers. In contrast, the
  representation of $$ f^{*}(\cdot ) $$ afforded by a representer theorem reduces the original (infinite-dimensional)
  minimization problem to a search for the optimal {\displaystyle n} n-dimensional vector of coefficients $$ \alpha =(
  \alpha _{1},...,\alpha _{n})\in \mathbb {R} ^{n} $$; $$ \alpha $$ can then be obtained by applying any standard
  function minimization algorithm. Consequently, <span style="color:green">representer theorems provide the theoretical
  basis for the reduction of the general machine learning problem to algorithms that can actually be implemented on
  computers in practice.</span>

**Tip**

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/functions.PNG" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

References
-------

1. [Justin Domke - UMASS Notes](https://people.cs.umass.edu/~domke/courses/sml2010/06kernels.pdf)
2. [Sumitra.S.Nair - IIST Notes](https://www.iist.ac.in/sites/default/files/people/RKHS.pdf)
3. [NPTEL - P S Shastry -IISc](http://nptel.ac.in/courses/117108048/37)
4. [Eric Xing - CMU Slides](https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~epxing/Class/10715/lectures/lecture6.pdf)
5. Wikipedia

Disclaimer
-------

Please feel free to contact me <vaisakhs.shaj@gmail.com> in case you find any errors/suggestions, I will correct those
promptly. You may as well comment below.

